

<!-- toc -->

- [1. Reification can be structural or behavioral. Considering the Java context, classify the following questions regarding the kind of reification that is needed to answer them.](#1-reification-can-be-structural-or-behavioral-considering-the-java-context-classify-the-following-questions-regarding-the-kind-of-reification-that-is-needed-to-answer-them)
- [(a) What is the class of this instance?](#a-what-is-the-class-of-this-instance)
- [(b) What was the call chain that triggered this error?](#b-what-was-the-call-chain-that-triggered-this-error)
- [(c) What are the parameters of this method?](#c-what-are-the-parameters-of-this-method)
- [(d) To which try-catch will the execution jump if we throw an exception?](#d-to-which-try-catch-will-the-execution-jump-if-we-throw-an-exception)
- [2. During a debugging session, the Interactive Development Environment (IDE) Visual Studio allows a running C# program to be interrupted (using breakpoints). Then, the source code can be modified in the IDE and the program execution can be resumed, but now using the modified source code. Do you consider that this is enough to qualify C# as a language with intercession capabilities? Why?](#2-during-a-debugging-session-the-interactive-development-environment-ide-visual-studio-allows-a-running-c%23-program-to-be-interrupted-using-breakpoints-then-the-source-code-can-be-modified-in-the-ide-and-the-program-execution-can-be-resumed-but-now-using-the-modified-source-code-do-you-consider-that-this-is-enough-to-qualify-c%23-as-a-language-with-intercession-capabilities-why)
- [3. Old Lisp implementations easily supported not only introspection but also intercession. To that end, a program was represented as data, which could be accessed and modified by the program itself. This provided considerable power to the programmer but also had considerable drawbacks. Which ones? Explain.](#3-old-lisp-implementations-easily-supported-not-only-introspection-but-also-intercession-to-that-end-a-program-was-represented-as-data-which-could-be-accessed-and-modified-by-the-program-itself-this-provided-considerable-power-to-the-programmer-but-also-had-considerable-drawbacks-which-ones-explain)
- [4. The concept of class precedence list exists in CLOS and Python but not in Java. Why? Explain.](#4-the-concept-of-class-precedence-list-exists-in-clos-and-python-but-not-in-java-why-explain)
- [5. Consider the following CLOS program:](#5-consider-the-following-clos-program)
  * [The following Java program is an incomplete attempt to replicate the behavior of the previous program:](#the-following-java-program-is-an-incomplete-attempt-to-replicate-the-behavior-of-the-previous-program)
  * [Without using the instanceof operator, type casts, or the reflective capabilities of the Java language, add the necessary fragments of code to complete the program so that it has the same behavior as the previous CLOS program.](#without-using-the-instanceof-operator-type-casts-or-the-reflective-capabilities-of-the-java-language-add-the-necessary-fragments-of-code-to-complete-the-program-so-that-it-has-the-same-behavior-as-the-previous-clos-program)
- [6. What is the purpose of Javassist? How does it operate? Explain.](#6-what-is-the-purpose-of-javassist-how-does-it-operate-explain)
- [7. Meta-programming benefits from the use of templates. Describe the differences between the template mechanisms that you studied in Lisp dialects vs the corresponding mechanisms that you studied in Javassist.](#7-meta-programming-benefits-from-the-use-of-templates-describe-the-differences-between-the-template-mechanisms-that-you-studied-in-lisp-dialects-vs-the-corresponding-mechanisms-that-you-studied-in-javassist)
- [8. The Julia language is lexically scoped, allows functions to be defined inside other functions and allows functions to be returned as values or stored in variables. What are the implications for the language implementation? Explain.](#8-the-julia-language-is-lexically-scoped-allows-functions-to-be-defined-inside-other-functions-and-allows-functions-to-be-returned-as-values-or-stored-in-variables-what-are-the-implications-for-the-language-implementation-explain)
- [9. It is known that a `let` form is equivalent to an expression involving an anonymous function. Using this idea, rewrite the following Julia expression so that it does not use the `let`:](#9-it-is-known-that-a-let-form-is-equivalent-to-an-expression-involving-an-anonymous-function-using-this-idea-rewrite-the-following-julia-expression-so-that-it-does-not-use-the-let)
- [10. In your project, you had to implement `macro`s and `fexpr`s. What are the similarities and the differences between a `macro` and a `fexpr`? Explain.](#10-in-your-project-you-had-to-implement-macros-and-fexprs-what-are-the-similarities-and-the-differences-between-a-macro-and-a-fexpr-explain)
- [11. Consider the famous Ackerman function:](#11-consider-the-famous-ackerman-function)
  * [(a) Define the previous function in Julia, using direct style.](#a-define-the-previous-function-in-julia-using-direct-style)
  * [(b) Define the previous function in Julia, using continuation-passing style. You can leave the operators in direct style.](#b-define-the-previous-function-in-julia-using-continuation-passing-style-you-can-leave-the-operators-in-direct-style)
  * [(c) Write an expression that uses the continuation-passing style version of the Ackerman function to compute A(2, 3).](#c-write-an-expression-that-uses-the-continuation-passing-style-version-of-the-ackerman-function-to-compute-a2-3)
- [12. Consider the call-with-current-continuation call/cc operator that is available in Scheme. What is the result of the following expression? Explain.](#12-consider-the-call-with-current-continuation-callcc-operator-that-is-available-in-scheme-what-is-the-result-of-the-following-expression-explain)
- [13. Consider the non-deterministic operators amb and fail, whose behavior is as follows:](#13-consider-the-non-deterministic-operators-amb-and-fail-whose-behavior-is-as-follows)
- [(a) Define a function named an-element-of that takes a list as an argument and nondeterministically returns an element of that list. For example:](#a-define-a-function-named-an-element-of-that-takes-a-list-as-an-argument-and-nondeterministically-returns-an-element-of-that-list-for-example)
- [(b) (1.0) Taking advantage of the function `an-element-of`, define the non-deterministic function `an-element-of-the-intersection` that, given two lists of numbers, returns an element of the intersection of those two lists. For example:](#b-10-taking-advantage-of-the-function-an-element-of-define-the-non-deterministic-function-an-element-of-the-intersection-that-given-two-lists-of-numbers-returns-an-element-of-the-intersection-of-those-two-lists-for-example)

<!-- tocstop -->

## 1. Reification can be structural or behavioral. Considering the Java context, classify the following questions regarding the kind of reification that is needed to answer them.

## (a) What is the class of this instance?

Structural

## (b) What was the call chain that triggered this error?

Behavioral

## (c) What are the parameters of this method?

Structural

## (d) To which try-catch will the execution jump if we throw an exception?

Behavioral

## 2. During a debugging session, the Interactive Development Environment (IDE) Visual Studio allows a running C# program to be interrupted (using breakpoints). Then, the source code can be modified in the IDE and the program execution can be resumed, but now using the modified source code. Do you consider that this is enough to qualify C# as a language with intercession capabilities? Why?

Não, quem está a simular capacidades de intercession do C# é o Visual Studio. O visual studio deve estar a recompilar e a correr o programa de novo de forma a parecer que o C# tenha intercession capabilities quando na realidade é o Visual Studio a recompilar o programa para simular intercession.

## 3. Old Lisp implementations easily supported not only introspection but also intercession. To that end, a program was represented as data, which could be accessed and modified by the program itself. This provided considerable power to the programmer but also had considerable drawbacks. Which ones? Explain.

The first one is in terms of performance, it is not possible to have a performant system when we have intercession capabilities. It is also not really safe to modify the code at run time because humans can make mistakes easily and can break the code when there isn't a compiler checking if the syntax is correct. Por fim, também tem consequência em termos de segurança, já que seria possível para hackers modificarem o código em run time.

## 4. The concept of class precedence list exists in CLOS and Python but not in Java. Why? Explain.

CLOS e Python suportam herança múltipla, o que não acontece em Java. Quando queremos ter herança múltipla precisamos de saber a ordem pela qual as classes são procuradas por isso é importante que não hajam ambiguidades. No caso do Java, não existe herança múltipla e por isso, não é preciso esta preocupação.

## 5. Consider the following CLOS program:

```
(defclass foo () ())

(defclass bar () ())

(defmethod mix ((x foo) (y foo))
    1
)

(defmethod mix ((x foo) (y bar))
    2
)

(defmethod mix ((x bar) (y foo))
    3
)

(defmethod mix ((x bar) (y bar))
    4
)

(defun combine (objects)
    (dolist (obj1 objects)
        (dolist (obj2 objects)
            (print (mix obj1 obj2))
        )
    )
)
```

### The following Java program is an incomplete attempt to replicate the behavior of the previous program:

```java
interface Mixable {
    public int mix(Mixable mixable);
}

class Foo implements Mixable {
    public int mix(Mixable mixable) {

    }
}

class Bar implements Mixable {
    public int mix(Mixable mixable) {

    }
}

public class Mixes {

    public static void combine(Mixable[] objects) {
        for(Mixable obj1: objects) {
            for(Mixable obj2: objects) {
                System.out.println(obj1.mix(obj2));
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### Without using the instanceof operator, type casts, or the reflective capabilities of the Java language, add the necessary fragments of code to complete the program so that it has the same behavior as the previous CLOS program.

```java
interface Mixable {
    public int mix(Mixable mixable);
    public int mixFoo();
    public int mixBar();
}

class Foo implements Mixable {
    public int mix(Mixable mixable) {
        mixable.mixFoo();
    }

    public int mixFoo() {
        return 1;
    }

    public int mixBar() {
        return 3;
    }
}

class Bar implements Mixable {
    public int mix(Mixable mixable) {
        mixable.mixBar();
    }

    public int mixFoo() {
        return 2;
    }

    public int mixBar() {
        return 4;
    }
}

public class Mixes {

    public static void combine(Mixable[] objects) {
        for(Mixable obj1: objects) {
            for(Mixable obj2: objects) {
                System.out.println(obj1.mix(obj2));
            }
        }
    }
}
```

## 6. What is the purpose of Javassist? How does it operate? Explain.

Javassist é uma biblioteca do Java que nos permite modificar ficheiros bytecode, isto é, permite que tenhamos intercession em load time. Modificar bytecode é uma tarefa complicada, por isso o Javassist simplifica o trabalho. O Javassist requer um template de código, uma string, e depois vai convertê-la em bytecode.

## 7. Meta-programming benefits from the use of templates. Describe the differences between the template mechanisms that you studied in Lisp dialects vs the corresponding mechanisms that you studied in Javassist.

Em Lisp os templates que usamos são código que quando executado vai produzir código também, isto pode fazer-se manualmente, usando quotes e quasiquotes. A ideia é que os templates são também eles, código para ser executado diretamente.

Em Javassist os templates que usamos são Strings que vão ser compiladas pelo compilador de Javassist e traduzidas para bytecode. Estes templates são parecidos à linguagem Java, mas há algumas diferenças, por exemplo, os argumentos em vez de serem identificados pelo nome, são identificados pela ordem em que aparecem na assinatura do metodo.

## 8. The Julia language is lexically scoped, allows functions to be defined inside other functions and allows functions to be returned as values or stored in variables. What are the implications for the language implementation? Explain.

A linguagem precisa de conseguir guardar o ambiente no qual a função é definida para poder usar esse ambiente quando a função é chamada. Isto requer que a linguagem seja capaz de capturar e de obter de novo esse ambiente.

## 9. It is known that a `let` form is equivalent to an expression involving an anonymous function. Using this idea, rewrite the following Julia expression so that it does not use the `let`:

```Julia
let x = 1
    x + let x = x + 1
        x + 3
    end
end
```

Solução:

```Julia
(function (x)
    x + (function (x)
        x + 3
    end)(x + 1)
end)(1)
```

## 10. In your project, you had to implement `macro`s and `fexpr`s. What are the similarities and the differences between a `macro` and a `fexpr`? Explain.

Assumindo que `fexpr` é uma função:

Macros servem como funções que não avaliam os seus argumentos quando são chamadas. Para além disso, também devolvem primeiro o resultado não avaliado e só depois é que o avaliam. São úteis para termos short-circuit operators como and e or. Se os argumentos fossem avaliados podiamos correr o risco de encontrar uma exceção.

No caso dos `fexpr` os seus argumentos são avaliados à partida, e o resultado também é logo avaliado.

## 11. Consider the famous Ackerman function:

$$
A(m, n) = \begin{cases}
n + 1 & \text{if } m = 0 \\
A(m - 1, 1) & \text{if } m > 0 \text{ and } n = 0 \\
A(m - 1, A(m, n - 1)) & \text{if } m > 0 \text{ and } n > 0.
\end{cases}
$$

### (a) Define the previous function in Julia, using direct style.

```Julia
function A(m, n)
    if m == 0
        return n + 1
    end

    if m > 0 && n == 0
        return A(m - 1, 1)
    end

    return A(m - 1, A(m, n - 1))
end
```

### (b) Define the previous function in Julia, using continuation-passing style. You can leave the operators in direct style.

```Julia
function A(m, n, c)
    if m == 0
        return c(n + 1)
    end

    if m > 0 && n == 0
        return A(m - 1, 1, c)
    end

    return A(m, n - 1, (x) -> A(m - 1, x, c))
end
```

### (c) Write an expression that uses the continuation-passing style version of the Ackerman function to compute A(2, 3).

A(2, 3, identity)

## 12. Consider the call-with-current-continuation call/cc operator that is available in Scheme. What is the result of the following expression? Explain.

```
>>  (+ 1
        (call/cc
            (lambda (c)
                (+ 2
                    (c (+ 3 4))
                )
            )
        )
    )
```

O resultado é 8. Quando chamamos call/cc, ainda não vamos saber o valor da continuação, e vamos atribuir o valor 7 à continuação quando chegamos ao `(c (+ 3 4))`, depois vamos voltar a executar o `call/cc`, que é apenas uma função que retorna 7. Adicionando 1 ficamos com 8.

## 13. Consider the non-deterministic operators amb and fail, whose behavior is as follows:

```
>>  (let ((i (amb 1 2)))
        (let ((j (amb 3 4)))
            (cons i j)
        )
    )
(1 . 3)
>> (fail)
(1 . 4)
>> (fail)
(2 . 3)
>> (fail)
(2 . 4)
>> (fail)
no-more-choices
```

## (a) Define a function named an-element-of that takes a list as an argument and nondeterministically returns an element of that list. For example:

```
>> (an-element-of '(1 3 5))
1
>> (fail)
3
>> (fail)
5
```

Solution:

```
(an-element-of (list) (
        (if (list? list)
            (fail)
            (amb (car list) (cdr list))
        )
    )
)
```

Tou a assumir que o `list?` retorne falso quando a lista está vazia porque seria o equivalente ao valor nulo, e verdadeiro caso contrário.

## (b) (1.0) Taking advantage of the function `an-element-of`, define the non-deterministic function `an-element-of-the-intersection` that, given two lists of numbers, returns an element of the intersection of those two lists. For example:

```
> (an-element-of-the-intersection '(1 2 3 4 5 6) '(4 5 6 7 8 9))
4
> (fail)
5
> (fail)
6
> (fail)
no-more-choices
```

Solução:

```
(an-element-of-the-intersection (list1 list2) (
        (if (equals? (an-element-of list1) (an-element-of list2))
            (an-element-of list1)
            (fail)
        )
    )
)
```
